A personal project with the aim of simulating the behaviour of plasma (harmonic oscillation), and outputting results into Para View to see a 3D animation of said oscillation.

In short, the project required me to do a lot of research on plasma physics, since I was a 1st year student at the time and plasma physics is usually taught in 3rd year or above. It also required me to research about numerical methods, which was actually a profound discovery for me, where I was amazed by the connection between science, math and computing.

It was my first time using C++, but since I had experience with C, I learnt quickly and was comfortable. 

Below is an indepth documentation, including the justifications for using certain physics equations and numerical methods, and the effectiveness of my C++ optimisation that resulted in a 20x plus speedup in the runtime of the solver, in comparison to running it without.


### C++ Optimisation ###
I start by stating that the original runtime of the solver before these optimisations for 9000 particles was approximately 45 minutes, and after, 256 seconds. We have implemented a Memory Arena, where we have allocated one large block of linear contiguous memory, which we then created our own allocation function within this ArenaAllocator class, to allocate everything in our program to this Arena. This results between a 2x to 10x speedup compared to standard new/malloc calls, since doing things that way, results in fragmented memory, not one contiguous block. Another benefit, is that at the end of the program we can simply free the Arena, instead of having to add code to free every part of allocated memory individually. 

There was another compiler optimisation to the code that greatly reduced the runtime of the simulation. That is, using OpenMP (compiler optimisation), where we added `#pragma omp parallel` directives above the triple nested for loops. The program runs normally until it hits these lines, then the master thread splits into a number of threads. Parallel execution of these nested parts occurs, reducing the runtime by 10-15x, even after the Arena implementation.

Another change that approximately had a 2x speedup, was changing the SOR weighting to 1.78, instead of 1.4. To make sure we don't have race conditions, we plot the data outputted to a CSV file to check if the total energy was conserved, and indeed it was the case.

### Solving $\phi$ ###
Our choice was to use Poisson's Equation $\nabla^2 \phi = -\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_0}$ to solve potential. Since in the PIC method, particles are modelled within the cells of a spatial grid, this mapping creates a continuous charge density distribution, and Poisson's equation relates the volume of charge density directly to the electric potential it creates. 

In a more complex simulation involving a large collection of particles, without this equation, we may have to calculate every interaction between every particle and every other particle, which would be an absurd amount of computation, at an $O(N^2)$ scaling. For $10^6$ particles, this is $10^{12}$ calculations per $\Delta t$. Instead, our method scales with the number of grid points $M$ which is linear.

Computers cannot calculate a derivative (which is a limit as $x \to 0$), thus we use Second-Order Central Difference derived from Taylor Series expansions. This allows us to express a continuous derivative using discrete neighbouring node points using the Finite Difference Method, where we add the expansions for the $i+1th$ and $i - 1th$ grid points, with the goal of isolating the Laplacian $\frac{d^2 \phi}{dx^2}$. After rearranging we get $\frac{d^2 \phi}{dx^2} \approx \frac{\phi_{i-1} - 2 \phi_{i} + \phi_{i+1}}{\Delta x^2}$ where the final error of the Taylor series approximation is proportional to the change in position squared over some $\Delta t$. Hence the name "Second-Order". *Note that*, starting from a constant charge density $\rho$, when we integrate once we get the electric field $E$, and integrating twice results in the potential $\phi$, hence in this case we want to isolate the second derivative.

Then, we convert the finite difference equations into a coefficient matrix system where we solve the system of linear equations created. The matrix is tridiagonal, since our approximation only relies on the $i-1$ and $i+1$ neighbouring nodes, we have three diagonals, for the coefficients of each term, $1$, $-2$, and $1$. Below is an example of such a matrix with $n=5$ where $n$ is the number of node points. $\begin{bmatrix}1 \\ 1 & -2 & 1 \\ &1&-2&1 \\ &&1&-2&1 \\ &&&1&1\end{bmatrix}$
This next step is a prime example of a somewhat elegant solution to solving a matrix in this context. Instead of, for example, solving the inverse matrix at $O(N^3)$, we take the three coefficient diagonals and turn them into linear arrays and use the Thomas algorithm to solve for $\phi$. If one knows how a matrix is stored in memory, one can see how quickly memory will be used in the context of solving a matrix for $10^6$ particles. We only use the above mentioned method in the solvePotentialDirect, but we can do something faster.

The solvePotentialGS function, is an iterative solver. It guesses the answer and then refines it over and over again until it is "good enough", by rearranging the Finite Difference equation into $\phi_i = \frac{1}{2}(\phi_{i-1}+\phi_{i+1}) + \frac{\Delta x^2 \rho_i}{2 \epsilon_0}$. Here we repeatedly compute this equation, noting that when you calculate $\phi_i$, you are using $\phi_{i-1}$ from the current iteration of the loop, and $\phi_{i+1}$ from the previous loop. Since we know that the standard Gauss-Seidel method experiences asymptotic convergence (as we get closer to the target, we step slower), we artificially increase the step size to converge faster, known as Successive Over-Relaxation. This can be seen where we don't simply set `phi[i] = g`, but we set it to `phi[i] + w*(g-phi[i])`, where `w = 1.4`. Finally, we check the residual, or the error across all iterations of the solver and an exit condition is used based on an error < $1*10^{-6}$. Since dealing with $(x,y,z)$ coordinates, the program solves for each coordinate point.

### Solving $E$ ###
To find the electric field $E = -\nabla \phi$, we need the first derivative (slope) of the potential. The electric field is also solved using Taylor Series expansions, but this time we subtract the $i+1th$ and $i-1th$ equations. This eliminates the second derivative terms and doubles the first derivative terms which is what we need and we get the resultant equation: $$ E_i \approx -\frac{\phi_{i+1}-\phi_{i-1}}{2\Delta x} $$
This is the Central Difference and is once again Second-Order accurate. 

### Particle-Grid Interaction ###
The purpose of the XtoL function is to map physical units to logical units, in other words, mapping meters where $x=0.0512$ meters, to some discrete integer index in a C++ vector container. The solution, we normalise the position once, $L_i = \frac{x_{particle} - x_0}{\Delta x}$. The function returns a double, e.g. $L_i = 4.75$, where it packs the cell index, in this case 4, and the intra-cell position, in this case 0.75. For this example, this would mean that the particle is in the 4th cell, 75% way across the cell. This way, we do one division, and avoid having to search the array to find where the particle is, we simply cast to int to get the index.

The gather function is used to estimate the field value at an arbitrary particle location between grid points, i.e. if a particle is at $L_i = 4.75$, we cannot simply give it the electric field value at node 4 or 5, both would be wrong. Thus, the solution, is linear interpolation, where we use the decimal part of what XtoL returns to calculate a weighted average $E_{particle} = E_i * (1-weight) + E_{i+1} * (weight)$. For example, if the particle is at 4.75, it takes 25% of the force from node 4, and 75% from 5. The continuity produced by this method provides smooth particle movement, varying the force continuously, and conserving energy much better than if we simply chose the nearest neighbour value.


